* SBHXY Build Manual

This is the build manual for the SBHXY.

* Common Build Hints

There are a couple of things that make easier.

** Captive Nuts

Captive nuts that go flat into a part are easier to insert using a longer bolt to push them in.

Captive nuts that go in sideways fit in with the point first into the
part and are easier to insert with pliers. Once you get it started use
the tips of your pliers to push the nut in the rest of the way.

** "Tightness"

[don't over tighten bolts. Most of the nuts on this printer sit in
printed parts or wood which will colapse or deform when over-tightened
which may prevent you from disassembling it later and will end up
looser than tightening the screws "just enough"]

[how do you know how much is enough?]

** [fitting laser slots together]

[these might be tight. If you hammer them or pull unevenly apart the melamine kind of delaminates.]

* Assembly Instructions

* Front Panel

[[./images/assembly front-panel.png]]

Parts:
 * Lasercut front panel
 * 4 of M3x25 SHCS
 * 4 of 10mm spacer with 3mm hole
 * 4 of M3 nylon lock nut
 * RepRapDiscount Smart Controller or clone
 * Optional: foam or foam tape, approximately 3mm thick

If your LCD is loose from the back PCB of the LCD, it will vibrate and make noise. Put foam between the two.

Install the LCD with 10mm spacers and M3x25 and lock nuts. The LCD
will be on the lower left corner as viewed from the front of the
machine, with the SD card sticking out to the left and the knob on the
right of the LCD.

* Frame "Skeleton"

[[./images/assembly frame-skeleton.png]]

Parts:
 * Lasercut front panel (with LCD installed)
 * Lasercut bottom panel
 * Lasercut back panel
 * Lasercut top panel
 * 12 of M3 hex nut
 * 12 of M3x12 SHCS

Assemble the following frame pieces: Top, Front, Bottom, Back. M3 nuts
are inserted into the traps then M3x12 bolts go through front and back
panels to hold the pieces together.

The bottom panel has the holes towards the back of the machine, with
the pair of non-symetrical holes on the right as the assembled machine
is viewed from the front. These holes mount the Z homing switch.

The back panel has a slot near the top corner, this also goes towards
the right as viewed from the front of the assembled machine.

The top panel is the same in every direction.

* Z-Axis

** Z Motor mount

[[./images/assembly z-bottom-motor.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Z motor mount
 * 6 of M3 hex nuts
 * 4 of M3x10 SHCS
 * NEMA17 Stepper Motor
 * GT2 Belt Pulley, 20 teeth with setscrews

Install the 6 M3 hex nuts into the traps using longer M3 bolts. The
ones going through the side of the printed part are easier to install
by putting the long bolt through, then threading the nut on, then
pulling bolt to seat the nut, then unscrewing the bolt.

** Z Idler

[[./images/assembly z-top-rodholder.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Z idler mount
 * 2 of 624 Flanged bearings
 * M4x20 SHCS
 * M4 hex nut
 * 2 of M4 flat Washer

Insert the washers on the outside, bearing pair in the middle into the
hole for the belt idler, insert the nut and bolt. The bearings should
spin easily, and not be loose between the printed part to slide along the bolt.

Insert the two M3 nuts into the nut traps using longer bolts to pull
them in place like before.

** Z Carriage

[[./images/assembly z-carriage.png]]

Parts:
 * 2 of Z lasercut Z side panels
 * lasercut Z top panel (has 8 rectangular holes and 4 round ones)
 * lasercut Z back panel
 * 4 of Printed Z bearing holder
 * Printed Z belt holder
 * Printed Z switch screw holder
 * 12 of M3 Hex Nut
 * 6 of M3x12 SHCS
 * 2 of M3x16 SHCS
 * 4 of M3x12 SHCS
 * about 18 inches (0.5 meter) of 6mm wide GT-2 Belt

Using a long bolt install 2 hex nuts into the traps on the belt
holder. 

Again, using the long bolt put 6 hex nuts into the traps on each of
the Z bearing holders.

Install one belt end in belt holder with pliers before assembling. The other belt end will be put in once both rod holders and the carriage are assembled.

[Don't fully tighten parts on back plate]

** Bed

[[./images/assembly z-bed.png]]

Parts:
 * Lasercut print bed (only 3 holes)
 * 3 of M3x30 FHCS (Flat head countersunk screws)
 * 6 of M3 Hex Nut
 * 6 of M4 flat washer
 * 3 of Spring
 * 3 or Printed thumb nut adapter
 * Z carriage assembly
 * Blue tape

If not already countersunk, countersink the holes in the lasercut
plate so the screw heads are flush or slightly lower than the
surrounding wood.

Insert nuts into the 3 thumb nut adapters with the help of a longer
bolt.

Insert the flat head bolts through the lasercut piece and tighten a
hex nut on each bolt all the way up to the plate.

On each bolt, add a M4 washer, spring, then another washer, then the
lower Z assembly top plate then the thumb nut adapter. Tighten the
thumb nuts so the springs are about half way compressed.

** Z-Axis assembly in frame

[[./images/assembly z-axis in frame.png]]

Parts:
 * 8 of M3x12 SHCS
 * 2 of 173mm 8mm smooth rod

Insert the rods into the idler and motor mounts. Loop the belt around the motor (slide the motor up first).

Bolt the Z motor mount and top mount into the frame.

Use pliers to install the other belt end. Loop the excess back and hold in place with a zip tie. Trim the zip tie.

Using M3 allen key through the holes in the back plate, tighten the screws on the back of the Z-carriage.

While pulling the motor downwards to tension the belt, tighten the motor screws to set the belt tension.

** Z-Axis homing switch

[[./images/assembly z-switch-mount.png]]
[[./images/assembly z-switch-mount-installed.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Z homing switch mount
 * Homing Switch SS-5GL [with approximately 8 inches of wires]
 * 2 of #4-1/2" wood screw
 * 2 of M3 Hex Nut
 * 2 of M3x25 SHCS

Insert nuts into traps.

Run the wood screws through the homing switch into the plastic part.

Bolt into the bottom plate of box using M3x25 screws.

* XY Assembly
** AB Motor mounts

[[./images/assembly a motor.png]]

Parts:
 * Lasercut left panel
 * Lasercut right panel
 * 2 of Printed AB Motor Mount
 * 2 of NEMA17 Stepper Motor
 * 8 of M3 Hex Nut
 * 8 of M3x10 SHCS
 * 8 of M3x12 SHCS
 * 8 of M3 Flat Washer

Put M3 nuts in the nut traps.
 
Install a motor with pulley in each motor mount using the M3x10 SHCS
and flat washers.

Bolt the motor mounts, loosely, to the left and right side panels
using M3x12 SHCS. The slotted holes let us tension the short belts later.

** X-Ends

[[./images/assembly x-ends.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Left X-End
 * Printed Right X-End
 * 8 of flanged 624 bearing for belt idler
 * 4 Printed X Idler Spacer (4mm hole, approx 11.6mm tall)
 * 2 of long LM8LUU Linear Bearing 8x15x45mm
 * 4 of M4 Hex Nut
 * 4 of M4 Flat Washer
 * 4 of M4x45 SHCS

Insert M4 nuts into nut traps.

Assemble the idlers as pictured. The idler stack is washer, bearing,
bearing then spacer. Make sure the spacers are on the correct side as pictured.

The belt-path on these parts should NOT be assembled as mirror images. 

[As long as both are assembled where each has one idler high, and the other low, and they are not built as mirror images you can assemble the rest fine]

** X Axis

[[./images/assembly x-axis.png]]

Parts:
 * Left X-end assembly
 * Right X-end assembly
 * 4 of short LMS8UU 8x15x17
 * 2 of 8mm smooth rod 173mm long

Carefully put two LMS8UU linear bearings on each smooth rod.

Insert the rods into the holes on the side of one X-end, then put the
other X-end on the other side.

** Back short rods

[[./images/assembly back short rods.png]]

Parts:
 * 2 of 5mm shaft, 100mm long
 * 4 of 20 tooth GT2 pulley
 * Printed pulley spacer (shorter, about 4.85mm long with 5mm bore)
 * Printed pulley spacer (longer, about 15.65mm long with 5mm bore)

Assemble the parts on the smooth rod as follows:
 * about 4mm of shaft bare
 * printed spacer
 * Pulley with belt closer to spacer. Tighten setscrews.
 * about 50mm of shaft bare
 * Pulley oriented in same direction. Leave setscrews slight loose, we
   will tighten them later.

One rod gets the longer spacer, and one the shorter spacer. 

Leave about 4mm of shaft sticking out of the spacer on one end of the shaft.

The pulley away from the spacer will be put in position later when
later parts are assembled.

** Back Lower short rod idlers

[[./images/assembly back lower short rod idlers.png]]

These parts go on the back of the machine and hold the lower end of
the short rods that drive the belts on the top.

Parts:
 * 2 of Printed Lower Rod Idler Holders
 * 4 of M4 hex nut
 * 2 of M4x14 SHCS
 * 2 of 625 roller bearing 5x16x6

Insert 625 bearing into hole by pressing them in. If they require more
force than you can do without tools, trim the hole with a hobby knife. Insert M4 nuts into traps.

Bolt to back panel using M4 bolts.

** Y Rod-holder back corners

[[./images/assembly y back rod holders.png]]

Parts:
 * 2 of Printed top corner for pulley (has bearing indent and rod
   holder).
 * Homing switch SS-5GL [with approximately 14 inch of wires]
 * 2 of #4-1/2" wood screw
 * 6 of M4 Hex Nut
 * 2 of 625 roller bearing 5x16x6

Insert the M4 nuts for all the nut traps.

Install the 625 bearings in the bottom of the printed parts by
pressing them in by hand. Clean out the printed part with a hobby
knife if it's too tight.

Install the homing switch on the back left corner using the 1/2" long
wood screws.

** Y Rod-holder front corners and idlers

[[./images/assembly y front rod holders.png]]

Parts:
 * 2 of Printed top corner for idler (has 8mm rod hole and no hole for
   bearings to sit in)
 * 2 of Printed bottom corner for idler (again, no bearing indent in
   this part)
 * 10 of M4 hex nut
 * 2 of M4x40 SHCS
 * 8 of 624 flanged bearing for belt idler
 * 6 of M4 flat washer

Insert M4 captive nuts into printed parts.

Assemble belt idler bolts in following order:
 * Bolt (M4x40)
 * Lower printed part
 * M4 washer
 * pair of flanged 624 bearings (flanges on outside to keep belt in place)
 * M4 washer
 * pair of flanged 624 bearings
 * M4 washer
 * Upper corner printed part (bolt goes through the bottom hole into
   captive nut inside)

** X-carriage back

[[./images/assembly x-carriage back.png]]

The image above shows the bearings installed which does not happen in
this step.

Parts:
 * Printed X-Carriage back half
 * Homing switch small D2F-01L [with approximately 24-30 inches of wires]
 * 5015 12V blower fan [with approximately 24-30 inches of wires]
 * 7 of M3 Hex Nut
 * #4-1/2" wood screw
 * 2 M3x20 FHCS (countersunk)

Insert the M3 nuts into the nut traps:
 * 2 for fan mounting
 * 2 for duct mounting
 * 3 for x-carriage front mounting
 * 1 for x-belt clamp

Install the homing switch using a single 1/2" long #4 wood screw. Put
the screw closer to the top (where the motor will mount)

Bolt the fan on using the flat head screws.

** XY first assembly

[[./images/assembly xy first.png]]

[get the Y rods into the Y ends and rod holders. Make sure the front
is the front and the left is the left. ]

Get the top plate and all XY parts.

Insert Y rods into bearings.

Insert 2 short LM8SUU bearings into each X rod. Insert X rods into X ends.

Put the Y ends on to the end of the Y rods. Bolt to top frame. 

Install the lower short rod holders in the back. Install the short rods, with a short closed loop belt loose around the shaft. [The tall spacer should go on the side where the X-end's outer idler is closer to the Y rods] Press up on the shaft while pushing down on the lower pulley and tighten the pulley setscrews to hold the rods in place.

[This is where you'd adjust alignment to get the Y frame to move smoothly]

Insert M3 captive nut into belt holders. This small part will hold one end of the belt and will be moved in/out to adjust belt tension. 

Insert one end of the belt into one part, threading the adjustment in only half way through the nut, and thread the belt through the full belt path, starting from the adjustable end, looping back around under the "fixed" clamp, then back through the other belt path to the other adjustable end. Once you've done this and made sure you didn't pull anything too tight, you can cut the belt in half and trim off the excess. There is room for about half an inch of excess on each belt length inside the X carriage.

** X carriage back on rails

Install the X carriage over the short bearings on the X rails. The
front half will clamp the bearings in place later, but first, the belts.

** XY assembly into frame

[[./images/assembly xy into frame.png]]

[insert into side of frame, bolt through the top]

[add the short rods with short belts]

** XY Belt

Parts:
 * Printed top and bottom belt holders (mirrored parts)
 * Printed Belt Clamp (flat on one side, ribbed on the other)
 * 2 of M3 hex nut
 * M3x16 SHCS
 * 2 of M3x35 SHCS

[The two belt paths as seen from the top of the machine when you're
facing the front wrap around a 'b' and 'd' shape. It doesn't matter
which is the top belt or the bottom, but the idlers on the X ends need
to be configured for what you've chosen. My CAD drawings have the 'd'
belt on top, and 'b' on the bottom.]

Start by using pliers to insert one end of the belt into the top belt
holder.

Insert a M3 nut into the nut trap and install on the X carriage by
threading the M3x35 bolt through the hole into the carriage and into
the nut on the far side of the belt holder. Only tighten the screw
enough to thread through the nut, the rest of the thread is used to
adjust the belt tension.

Feed the belt through the belt path for the upper belt
(counter-clockwise around a 'd' if you're following the CAD drawings)
and back to the other side of the X carriage.

Insert the M3x16 screw through the flat side of the belt
clamp. Take the belt that's now feeding into the right side of the
X-carriage and put it under the clamp and loop the belt back out the
right side of the X carriage for the bottom portion of the belt path.

Route the belt through the lower belt path (clockwise around a 'b' if
you're following the CAD drawing). Using pliers, insert the other end
of the belt into the other belt holder like the first one. Install a
M3 nut into the belt holder and bolt into the lower portion of the
X-carriage using another M3x35 going through the x-carriage and into
the nut as before.

I expect the belt is a bit loose at this point, so before using the
adjustment on the M3x35mm screws, loosen the M3x16 going through the
rectangular clamp where the belt does a U-turn and pull on the belt to
get both belts on but not super tight with about the same tension.

Verify your belts are all routed correctly, for example not falling
off the side of pulleys or idlers. 

At this point, I expect the belts to be on tight enough to not fall
off but not tight enough to make a note when plucked. Also, the nuts
on the left side of the x-carriage (as you're facing the front of the
machine) should have only the tip of M3x35mm screw poking through so
we can adjust the belts tighter later. If you need to adjust the
belts, loosen the part where the belts U-turn to loosen the belts then
put them back.

(the slit in the X-end belt holders that slide onto the belt should
face towards the center of the two belts)

** X carriage front

[[./images/assembly x-carriage front.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed X-Carriage Front
 * 3 of M3x25 SHCS
 * 2 of M3 Hex Nut

Insert M3 nuts into the traps for the hotend groove mount.

Using 3 M3x25 SHCS and an allen key, attach the front half of the
X-Carriage to the back half. Make sure the linear bearings are all
seated well before tightening the screws. Don't over-tigthen the
screws.

** E3d hotend

[assemble the e3d hotend, fan on fan duct. the teflon tube should
stick out [3 inches]. Will be trimmed further when installing on extruder]

[the heater cartridge shouldn't stick more than 1.5mm out of the end of
the heater block]

** Extruder Plate

[[./images/assembly extruder plate.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Extruder Plate
 * Printed Hotend Clamp
 * 2 of M3x20 SHCS
 * M3x8 flat head (countersunk) screw
 * 2 of M3x12 SHCS
 * NEMA17 Stepper for extruder
 * Extruder filament drive gear
 * e3d v6 assembly with at least 3 inches of filament guide tube
 * Hobby knife with sharp blade

Attach the NEMA17 motor and extruder plate to the front of the
X-carriage using the M3x12 screws.

Insert the filament tube of the hotend into the extruder plate. It
should be too long and stick out past where the filament drive gear
is. 

Insert the groove into the groove clamp and trim off the excess
filament guide tube around the printed part. Clamp down the groove
mount with the printed clamp and two M3x20 SHCS.

Install the filament drive gear on the motor shaft with the setscrew
futher away from the motor. Align the setscrew on the flat of the
motor shaft, and the filament teeth with the filament path, and
tighten the drive gear setscrew.

** Extruder Idler lever

[[./images/assembly extruder idler.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed Extruder Idler
 * 608 Skate bearing 8x22x7
 * M3x16 SHCS
 * M5x10
 * M5 Flat Washer

Insert the 608 bearing over the post on the printed extruder
idler. Secure the 608 bearing on the printed part with the M5 bolt and
washer.

Install the extruder idler on the top right screw of the extruder
motor using the M3x16 screw. Only lightly tighten this screw so the
idler can still rotate in and out.

Bolt the 608 bearing to the extruder idler. assemble the bolt that
sets the idler tension.]

** Extruder Idler Bolt

[[./images/assembly extruder tension bolt.png]]

Parts:
 * 2 of Printed Idler Pivot (small half cylinder things with a
   circular hole in the flat face)
 * M3x45 bolt
 * M3 hex nut
 * Extruder Spring
 * 2 of M4 flat washer
 * A couple feet of piece of PLA filament.

Insert the long bolt through the flat face of the pivot, through the
extruder idler lever, then through the round face of the pivot,
washer, spring, washer then m3 nut.

The second pivot snaps on to the front face of the extruder.

Feed some filmaent into the top of the extruder through the idler. You
should be able to push it enough to move the filament idler back, but
when you pull the filament back out it should not be flattened by the
pressure. Having small teeth marks and a thin flat on the opposite
side is about the right amount of tension.

** Blower

Parts:
 * 5015 blower
 * 2 of M3x20 screws (preferably flat head/countersunk)

Install the blower on the back of the X-carriage with M3x20 screws.

** Blower Duct

[[./images/assembly blower duct.png]]

Parts:
 * Printed blower duct
 * Aluminum foil tape
 * 2 of M3x10 SHCS
 * hobby knife

[put aluminum foil tape on the top next to where the heater block
goes, and on the bottom to make it easier to clean when melted plastic
tries to stick to it. Trim foil with hobby knife for nozzle
hole. Attach to x carriage with M3 bolts. verify heater cartridge,
clamp screw, and other hot parts have gap away from foil
tape. They will conduct heat into plastic part.]

* Frame Left/right

Mount printrboard on the inside of the right frame

Wire up everything (homing switches, wires going out the back, motors, power-input, LCD).

The power switch mount holder bolts to the back of the frame.

Bolt on the left side frame. loop the short belt around the motor pulley. Pull the motor towards the front of the printer to set the belt tension, and while holding it there tighten the 4 screws holding the motor in place on the left plate.

Do the same on the right plate.

* Odds and ends

Wire extensions?

Install filament guide mount and wire guide (bolts go from inside of printer into printed part)

Install filament guide tube between tube mount and extruder. This is not held in when there's no filament installed so it can easily come out to change filament.

Install knob on front of LCD to suit your tastes.

Install spool holder. Insert tab into hole on back, lift part upwards and rotate into place. This removes easily for travel.

** Lights?

[yeah, you can install lights]

* First Print
Lots to write up here:
 * Adjust the tension on the filament idler nut so that the filament
   doesn't end up with a large flat on one side if you take it back
   out of the extruder.
 * Adjust homing position at bottom so z-carriage barely doesn't
   bottom out
 * Adjust bed position to be very low.
 * Jog from Z home to Z of 0 slowly to not crash into nozzle.
 * Adjust bed to be near nozzle and level.
 * Optional?: Adjust z-height in firmware.
